### SQL

Relational data model : 
-  Data is organised into relations, called *tables*.
-  Each relation is an unordered collection of *tuples* *(rows)*.

In a relational database query optimiser decides which parts of the query to execute in which order and which indexes to use.
### NoSQL
- NoSQL should be interpreted as "Not only SQL".

Driving forces behind NoSQL : 
- A need for greater scalability than relational databases can easily achieve, including very large datasets or very high write throughput.
- A widespread preference for free and open source software over commercial database products;
- Specialised query operations that are not well supported by the relational model;
- Frustration with the restrictiveness of relational schemas, and a desire for a more dynamic and expressive data model.

**Polyglot persistence** - when SQL databases are used alongside NoSQL.

**Impedance mismatch** - most applications are developed in OOP languages nowadays, therefore we need a translation layer that would translate the entities into relational structure.

JSON representation has better *locality*, than the multi-table schema. This avoids multiple queries (n + 1 (?)) or joins.

The advantage of using and **id** is useful because it has no meaning for humans, therefore it doesn't need to change. Anything that has meaning to humans may change in the future and all of it's copies will need to get updated. This incurs risk of write overheads and inconsistencies, where some of the information is updated, but other isn't. Removing such duplication is the key idea behind *normalisation*.

Document databases offer worse support for many-to-one and many-to-many relationships.

It's a good idea to use document databases when data model represents a tree of one-to-many relationships, where typically the entire tree is loaded at once.

*Shredding* - technique of splitting document-like structure into multiple tables can lead to cumbersome schemas and unnecessary code.

**Choosing document database where data model consists of many-to-many relationships often moves complexity into application code.**

Schema flexibility : 
- Schema-on-write, where structure of data model is enforced during the write. Relational databases.
- Schema-on-read, where structure of data model is enforced during the read. Document databases.

Locality of data storage can have advantages and disadvantages. If you need to access document often, since the document is in the one place, there aren't as many disk seeks as for example doing a multi-table read, however if you need part of the document, that means that usually you need to load the whole document in to memory. Also only the modifications to the document that don't change size are fast. That widely limits the performance application of document databases.


### Graph-like data models

Useful when there are mainly many-to-many relationships in a data model.

Graph consists of two kinds of objects :
- Vertices (nodes, entities)
- Edges (relationships)

*Property graph model* - Neo4j, Titan, Infinite graph.
*Triple-store model* - Datomic, AllegroGraph.

#### Property Graph

In a property graph model, each vertex consists of :
- Unique identifier;
- A set of outgoing edges;
- A set of incoming edges;
- A collection of properties (key-value pairs).

Each edge consists of :
- Unique identifier;
- The vertex at which the edge starts (the tail vertex);
- The vertex at which the edge ends (the head vertex);
- A label to describe the kind of relationship between the two vertices;
- A collection of properties.


```sql
	CREATE TABLE  vertices (
		vertex_id integer PRIMARY KEY,
		properties json
	);
	 CREATE TABLE edges (
		 edge_id integer PRIMARY KEY,
		 tail_vertex integer REFERENCES vertices (vertex_id),
		 head_vertex integer REFERENCES vertices (vertex_id),
		 label text,
		 properties json
	 );
	 CREATE INDEX edges_tails ON edges (tail_vertex);
	 CREATE INDEX edges_heads ON edges (head_vertex);
```

Cypher query language is used within Neo4j.


### Triple-stores

Triple store is mostly equivalent to a property graph-model and uses different words to describe same concepts.

In a triple-store, all information is stored in three-part statements :
- Subject;
- Predicate;
- Object;
E.g. (jim, likes, bananas). Subject is equivalent to a vertex in graph. 

The object is one 2 things :
- A value if a primitive datatype, such as a string or a number. In that case predicate and object of the triple are equivalent to key and value. For example (lucy, age, 33) -> {"age" : 33}.
- Another vertex. In that case predicate is an edge of the graph.


Graph and Document databases are both considered NoSQL. Document databases are useful when documents are self-contained and relationships are rare. On the other hand graph databases are useful when anything is related to everything.